
SIP: Session Initiation Protocol


19.1 SIP and SIPS Uniform Resource Indicators

   A SIP or SIPS URI identifies a communications resource.  Like all
   URIs, SIP and SIPS URIs may be placed in web pages, email messages,
   or printed literature.  They contain sufficient information to
   initiate and maintain a communication session with the resource.

   Examples of communications resources include the following:

      o  a user of an online service

      o  an appearance on a multi-line phone

      o  a mailbox on a messaging system

      o  a PSTN number at a gateway service

      o  a group (such as "sales" or "helpdesk") in an organization

   A SIPS URI specifies that the resource be contacted securely.  This
   means, in particular, that TLS is to be used between the UAC and the
   domain that owns the URI.  From there, secure communications are used
   to reach the user, where the specific security mechanism depends on
   the policy of the domain.  Any resource described by a SIP URI can be
   "upgraded" to a SIPS URI by just changing the scheme, if it is
   desired to communicate with that resource securely.

19.1.1 SIP and SIPS URI Components

   The "sip:" and "sips:" schemes follow the guidelines in RFC 2396 [5].
   They use a form similar to the mailto URL, allowing the specification
   of SIP request-header fields and the SIP message-body.  This makes it
   possible to specify the subject, media type, or urgency of sessions
   initiated by using a URI on a web page or in an email message.  The
   formal syntax for a SIP or SIPS URI is presented in Section 25.  Its
   general form, in the case of a SIP URI, is:

      sip:user:password@host:port;uri-parameters?headers

   The format for a SIPS URI is the same, except that the scheme is
   "sips" instead of sip.  These tokens, and some of the tokens in their
   expansions, have the following meanings:

      user: The identifier of a particular resource at the host being
         addressed.  The term "host" in this context frequently refers
         to a domain.  The "userinfo" of a URI consists of this user
         field, the password field, and the @ sign following them.  The
         userinfo part of a URI is optional and MAY be absent when the



Rosenberg, et. al.          Standards Track                   [Page 148]

RFC 3261            SIP: Session Initiation Protocol           June 2002


         destination host does not have a notion of users or when the
         host itself is the resource being identified.  If the @ sign is
         present in a SIP or SIPS URI, the user field MUST NOT be empty.

         If the host being addressed can process telephone numbers, for
         instance, an Internet telephony gateway, a telephone-
         subscriber field defined in RFC 2806 [9] MAY be used to
         populate the user field.  There are special escaping rules for
         encoding telephone-subscriber fields in SIP and SIPS URIs
         described in Section 19.1.2.

      password: A password associated with the user.  While the SIP and
         SIPS URI syntax allows this field to be present, its use is NOT
         RECOMMENDED, because the passing of authentication information
         in clear text (such as URIs) has proven to be a security risk
         in almost every case where it has been used.  For instance,
         transporting a PIN number in this field exposes the PIN.

         Note that the password field is just an extension of the user
         portion.  Implementations not wishing to give special
         significance to the password portion of the field MAY simply
         treat "user:password" as a single string.

      host: The host providing the SIP resource.  The host part contains
         either a fully-qualified domain name or numeric IPv4 or IPv6
         address.  Using the fully-qualified domain name form is
         RECOMMENDED whenever possible.

      port: The port number where the request is to be sent.

      URI parameters: Parameters affecting a request constructed from
         the URI.

         URI parameters are added after the hostport component and are
         separated by semi-colons.

         URI parameters take the form:

            parameter-name "=" parameter-value

         Even though an arbitrary number of URI parameters may be
         included in a URI, any given parameter-name MUST NOT appear
         more than once.

         This extensible mechanism includes the transport, maddr, ttl,
         user, method and lr parameters.





Rosenberg, et. al.          Standards Track                   [Page 149]

RFC 3261            SIP: Session Initiation Protocol           June 2002


         The transport parameter determines the transport mechanism to
         be used for sending SIP messages, as specified in [4].  SIP can
         use any network transport protocol.  Parameter names are
         defined for UDP (RFC 768 [14]), TCP (RFC 761 [15]), and SCTP
         (RFC 2960 [16]).  For a SIPS URI, the transport parameter MUST
         indicate a reliable transport.

         The maddr parameter indicates the server address to be
         contacted for this user, overriding any address derived from
         the host field.  When an maddr parameter is present, the port
         and transport components of the URI apply to the address
         indicated in the maddr parameter value.  [4] describes the
         proper interpretation of the transport, maddr, and hostport in
         order to obtain the destination address, port, and transport
         for sending a request.

         The maddr field has been used as a simple form of loose source
         routing.  It allows a URI to specify a proxy that must be
         traversed en-route to the destination.  Continuing to use the
         maddr parameter this way is strongly discouraged (the
         mechanisms that enable it are deprecated).  Implementations
         should instead use the Route mechanism described in this
         document, establishing a pre-existing route set if necessary
         (see Section 8.1.1.1).  This provides a full URI to describe
         the node to be traversed.

         The ttl parameter determines the time-to-live value of the UDP
         multicast packet and MUST only be used if maddr is a multicast
         address and the transport protocol is UDP.  For example, to
         specify a call to alice@atlanta.com using multicast to
         239.255.255.1 with a ttl of 15, the following URI would be
         used:

            sip:alice@atlanta.com;maddr=239.255.255.1;ttl=15

         The set of valid telephone-subscriber strings is a subset of
         valid user strings.  The user URI parameter exists to
         distinguish telephone numbers from user names that happen to
         look like telephone numbers.  If the user string contains a
         telephone number formatted as a telephone-subscriber, the user
         parameter value "phone" SHOULD be present.  Even without this
         parameter, recipients of SIP and SIPS URIs MAY interpret the
         pre-@ part as a telephone number if local restrictions on the
         name space for user name allow it.

         The method of the SIP request constructed from the URI can be
         specified with the method parameter.




Rosenberg, et. al.          Standards Track                   [Page 150]

RFC 3261            SIP: Session Initiation Protocol           June 2002


         The lr parameter, when present, indicates that the element
         responsible for this resource implements the routing mechanisms
         specified in this document.  This parameter will be used in the
         URIs proxies place into Record-Route header field values, and
         may appear in the URIs in a pre-existing route set.

         This parameter is used to achieve backwards compatibility with
         systems implementing the strict-routing mechanisms of RFC 2543
         and the rfc2543bis drafts up to bis-05.  An element preparing
         to send a request based on a URI not containing this parameter
         can assume the receiving element implements strict-routing and
         reformat the message to preserve the information in the
         Request-URI.

         Since the uri-parameter mechanism is extensible, SIP elements
         MUST silently ignore any uri-parameters that they do not
         understand.

      Headers: Header fields to be included in a request constructed
         from the URI.

         Headers fields in the SIP request can be specified with the "?"
         mechanism within a URI.  The header names and values are
         encoded in ampersand separated hname = hvalue pairs.  The
         special hname "body" indicates that the associated hvalue is
         the message-body of the SIP request.

   Table 1 summarizes the use of SIP and SIPS URI components based on
   the context in which the URI appears.  The external column describes
   URIs appearing anywhere outside of a SIP message, for instance on a
   web page or business card.  Entries marked "m" are mandatory, those
   marked "o" are optional, and those marked "-" are not allowed.
   Elements processing URIs SHOULD ignore any disallowed components if
   they are present.  The second column indicates the default value of
   an optional element if it is not present.  "--" indicates that the
   element is either not optional, or has no default value.

   URIs in Contact header fields have different restrictions depending
   on the context in which the header field appears.  One set applies to
   messages that establish and maintain dialogs (INVITE and its 200 (OK)
   response).  The other applies to registration and redirection
   messages (REGISTER, its 200 (OK) response, and 3xx class responses to
   any method).

